1. gear talk on the internet is unavoidable
2. group formation on internet forums
3. article based on forum conversations about JHS-Kemper, NAM, gain-staging for digital
4. "gear talk on the internet" can reveal much more than futile consumerism
5. retracing how idea aggregates take shape helps us see consensus and objectivity being collectively built in the discussions
6. explain Callon/Latour/Orders of Justification
7. JHS story; biggest pedal collection
8. JHS show: history, education, entertainment, mythbusting
9. Josh's influence: Bad Monkey case
10. JHS Show uses an amp (Loud Is More Good)
11. JHS Show demo signal-path
12. Disclosure episode released (with episode thumbnail)
13. Disclosure episode description (w/ LIMG image)
14. "We did a blind test for a whole year and no one noticed"
15. Kemper substitutes for amp; JHS profiles ad (w/ image)
16. JHS's blind test fed-off discussion on guitars and amps
17. Tubes are old tech and considered the best sound
18. Tube amps' shortcomings
19. People still complain about these shortcomings (w/ examples)
20. SS is its own thing; doesn't replace tubes
21. Examples about SS ("SS is accurate, but guitarists don't want accurate" or SS wasn't ready for prime time when it came out)
22. Many threads tubes vs SS, digital is more nuanced
23. Brief history of modellers
24. 3rd kind of amp: digital/analog SS hybrid
25. tubes vs SS vs digital > analog vs digital
26. two paradigms (characteristics of analog vs characteristics of digital)
27. FALAR AQUI DAS POSICOES E ENTAO ENTRAR NA ETNOGRAFIA DE NOVO, APRESENTANDO O QUE AS PESSOAS DISSERAM NO CASO DO JHS-KEMPER **SOBRE AMPS, NÃO SOBRE A HONESTIDADE DO JOSH ETC**
28. The Kemper video was on brand and didn't really harm them
29. Exemplos de gente pichando a JHS
30. there's more people who go back and forth between tubes and digital than those who stick with analog, despite being tube or SS
31. Comparison with pedals
32. Tubes consume too much energy
33. Electron doesn't know; what matters is how you voice (Fowler diz o mesmo); digital might be the missing ingredient
34. NAM and FLOSS: modelling and profiling; null tests; NAM vs Kemper/QC/Fractal/Helix/ToneX/etc; against elitism, lowering barrier of entry
35. the argument of "feel" surfaced as the tone became indistinguishable
36. "nothing but tubes" keeps outsiders/children in their place
37. tube amps are aspirational
38. NAM users criticize selling profiles
39. Fowler
40. Tech as (artistic) enabler
41. Tech: democratizing force (example: software)
42. Software compared to gear
43. Home Studio (software-based) has disadvantages
44. Guitar software vs guitar hardware (tinkering and tweaking)
45. software as a metonymy for technology/sometimes a person celebrates software features to see that be turned on its head
46. Rock band as the model
47. the home studio is the way to go in a world in which very few make a living as musicians
48. Software flexibility
49. Hardware tweakability
50. Modding hardware vs modding software; ecosystem lock-in (presets, profiles); FOSS
51. Divide between software and hardware, UI as mitigator
52. Comparisons between the real thing and software emulation
53. Argument compilation: nothing does what a tube does; digital is now indistinguishable; sounds like but feels different; the differences don't matter in practice

